Welcome, in this video, we're going to change the default branch of our GitHub repository.
I'm currently logged into GitHub, and I'm in the "website" GitHub repository.
I'm currently on the master branch, and at this point in time, it is the only branch we have;
however, in some work flows, the master branch represents what's currently in production,
and active development should not happen on the master branch directly.
Instead, there should be another branch that is also long-lived
where all the development effort goes, and then, periodically,
those changes are merged back into master
when the codebase reaches production ready status.
So, let's set up our new develop long-live branch.
I'm going to expand out our branch dropdown, and in the search or create branch field,
I'm going to create a branch called develop, then press enter.
The branch named develop has been created, and is currently even with master.
That's OK; we don't need to make any commits for this demo.
Now, on the right hand side, we have our repository menu.
One of those options is settings, so click on settings.
These are the settings for this specific repository.
Under the main heading for settings, we have the repository name,
which we have renamed before, and we also have our default branch.
If we expand our dropdown, we have master, which is the current selection, and develop.
To change it, we just select develop. Now we can click on "Update" to set this.
GitHub will warn us since changing the default branch is not a trivial change;
it does have some consequences, in particular how new pull requests and clones react.
I'm going to click on "I understand, update the default branch."
Great, now develop is my new default branch,
and I have a little banner at the top that confirms this change.
I'm going to dismiss the banner. Now, let's get back to the main page for our repository,
by clicking on the name of the repository.
Right away, we see one effect of changing our default branch;
when we click on the name of our repository, we always land on our default branch,
which now is develop. Let's check out another side effect;
expand the branch dropdown, and let's create a new feature branch.
I'm going to create a throw away branch called "just-a-demo",
and before I can issue a pull request, I need to have at least one commit
different from the originating branch.
So, I'm going to click on the faithful Readme file, and make a quick edit.
Once I've entered a commit message, click on "Commit changes".
Now, let's click on the name of the repository; that returns us to our main repository page,
and GitHub detects that we have a newly created branch.
In doing so, it offers us the option to compare and do a pull request.
Let's click on that button; the other side effect of changing the default branch
is when we go to create our pull request, our destination, or base branch,
is now defaulted to the new default branch, which is now develop.
For this example, I'm not going to go through with the pull request;
this was just a quick example to show this change in behavior.
Click on "website", now I'm going to delete the branch from the branches tab.
Find "just-a-demo" and click on the trash can. Great, now we've deleted that.
One last side effect I want to show, and that is what happens when you clone.
So, I'm going to scroll down, and below the repository menu are the clone options.
It's currently set to SSH, which is how I usually clone,
and then click on the copy to clipboard button.
That should copy the value that's currently in this field.
If you don't have it, then you can double-click on this field, select all the text within it,
and then copy the URL so that that URL will be in your clipboard.
Now, let's go to our terminal; back on our local system,
I'm currently within the website Git repository,
but, for this example, I actually need to delete this repository and start over.
So, I'm going to back up one level, that takes us to our
"projects" folder, under our user's home directory.
I'm going to forcefully and recursively delete the website folder.
So, now we're left with a demo repository that we created earlier.
Now type "git clone" and then paste in the value that should be in your clipboard,
which should point to your GitHub repository. Once you've done that, press enter.
Great, let's go into the website repository,
that's now been re-cloned onto our local system.
Now you see the other effect; that is the default branch that we get
when we clone a repository from GitHub will use the default branch set on GitHub.
So, now, it is set to develop; our local repository doesn't actually have a master branch,
and the develop branches are set up as tracking branches.
If I wanted to get the master branch on my local system,
I would have to check that branch out and fetch it down from the remote repository:
"git checkout master". Since there was no master branch on our local system,
Git went out to our remote, origin, and brought in the 'origin/master' branch
and set that up as our local master branch.
So now, we have both master and develop on our local system;
however, develop is still the default branch on GitHub.